"The Harmful Books, Myrto's Stiff Neck and the Silliness of Silliness" by Alki Zei

Grandfather was right when he mentioned that all we seemed to have were holidays. One day, shortly after his remark, we had barely sat through two classes when, at recess, Mr Karanasis gathered us in the schoolyard and instructed us to form a line. "You will not be returning to your classrooms," he announced. "Instead, I am going to take you to the town square where the entire school will learn a great and important lesson."

"Do you think he's going to take us on one of those 'Know-your-Community' walks?" I asked Alexis. "Something else is happening," he answered. "The upper classes are going too. They're too big for that."

When we reached the square, it was a scene of utter confusion. Right in the middle, where the column with the marble lion stood, a massive bonfire was blazing. A little beyond it, on a platform, stood the Mayor, Amstradam Pikipikiram, Pipitsa's father, and the Bishop in his vestments. People were gathered all around the bonfire, mostly children from the schools. We couldn't discern what was happening.

Suddenly, two men arrived carrying enormous sacks on their shoulders. They pushed people aside to get through. Upon reaching the fire, they emptied their sacks onto it. They were books!

"What are they doing?" Alexis asked a boy standing next to us. "They are burning the harmful books," he informed us. "Let's get closer and watch," Alexis suggested. Mr Karanasis climbed onto the platform and began to lecture about the harmful and dreadful books that poison the soul and make man criminal.

We maneuvered our way through the crowd and came close to the bonfire. The scene was reminiscent of St. John's Eve, when children light bonfires to burn the May Day wreaths and jump over them. The older students were taking running leaps. It was fascinating to see how the books burned. At first, the book opened as if some invisible hand touched it when the pages caught fire. Then, as it burned, it looked like a flower closing its petals.

The fire died down after a while, and the primary-school children could jump over it. However, the men returned with their sacks and refilled the fire. The flames surged higher and higher, and the children shrieked. They cheered on who could leap the highest. Suddenly, some of the books landed right at our feet as a sack was being dumped. I began to kick one of them toward the fire, but then I halted. I recognized that book. It had a black binding with gold letters on the cover. I nudged the cover open with my shoe, and then I was certain. It was one of Grandfather's Ancients. Grandfather had signed all his books with his signature in purple ink on the flyleaf. I recognized it immediately. Grandfather never let anyone touch his books. How had his Ancient ended up here, ready to fall into the fire?

I stopped and picked it up, holding it in my hand for a moment. "Well, throw it!" Alexis whispered to me. He snatched the book from my hand and hurled it into the fire. "Can't you see they're watching you?"

I felt confused. From the platform, Mr Karanasis and Pikipikiram were looking in my direction and saying something. I glanced around me. Children and even adults were yelling and leaping over the fire. However, most people were merely standing there silently, their lips pressed together. I scanned their faces one by one, expecting to see a man with his hat brim

 pulled down so that it nearly hid his eyes and with a thick mustache, like a brush.

Without even knowing why, I started to push past the other children to escape from the tightening circle that was drawing Alexis and me, who were standing in the front row, ever closer to the bonfire. Alexis followed me. We moved away from the crowd to catch our breath. In the air above us, bits of charred paper flew about like bats.

"You should have seen the look Mr Karanasis gave you when you bent over to pick up that book!" Alexis said.

When the fire finally went out, and they had no more books to throw on it, the crowd began to disperse. Mr Karanasis mentioned that it was too late for us to return to school and dismissed us. Alexis and I set off for home. For some reason, I had not yet told him that the book I had hesitated to pick up was one of Grandfather's Ancients. When we left the square, I noticed Grandfather standing near the wall of a house. Beside him stood Alexis' father. They didn't know each other. They stood almost back-to-back, not speaking. Grandfather was poking at the burned paper that littered the street and the sidewalk with his cane. Alexis and I ran toward them.

"Grandfather, one of your Ancients got into the fire!" I said. Grandfather nodded his head. "I know". Alexis' father turned around in surprise. "Well, Melissa, introduce me to your grandfather." "Grandfather, this is Alexis' father..." The two of them were shaking hands even before I could finish.

"Did they take some of your books?" Alexis' father asked in a low voice. "They came this morning with their sacks," my grandfather replied. Looking around, Alexis' father said, "They took my manuscripts as well."

When we got home, Grandfather took me into his study. On the shelves, the empty spaces gaped where the missing books had once stood. "What you saw today, Melissa, is something you must never forget as long as you live. And after I am dead, I want the places where the books were to remain empty, just to remind you." That's what my grandfather said. And for the first time in my life, from the time I was born, I suppose, I saw him sit with his back hunched and not straight up, as he always had.
