"The Book Burning"

The book burning was orchestrated by the German Student Association (Deutsche Studentenschaft, DSt), a union of all student councils at German universities. From 1931 onwards, the German Student Association fell increasingly under the influence of the National Socialist German Students' Association (Nationalsozialistischer Deutscher Studentenbund, NSDStB) and the NSDAP. The infamous book burning of May 10, 1933, marked the zenith of the “Action against the Un-German Spirit”, which had commenced on April 12, 1933. Through flyers and press releases, the students urged for a purge of German literature of the “Jewish subversive spirit” and demanded their peers to denounce “incompetent” university teachers and students. They also advocated for the “cleansing” of university and institute libraries of the denounced literature.

The book burning, the high point and conclusion of this action, simultaneously occurred in 22 German university cities. On the evening of May 10, a torchlight procession passed through Berlin, originating from the student house on Oranienburger Straße and concluding at Opernplatz, where a large pile of wood had been arranged. Joseph Goebbels, the Reich Minister of Public Enlightenment and Propaganda, delivered a passionate speech to the gathered crowd on Opernplatz. Similar events took place in other cities – following a “fire oath”, students tossed books onto the bonfire, reciting the names of the respective authors. Works by Karl Marx, Sigmund Freud, Heinrich Mann, Erich Maria Remarque, Kurt Tucholsky, Anna Seghers, Alfred Döblin, Heinrich Heine, and many others were incinerated. The German bookselling trade's stock exchange gazette later released a list of 131 authors whose books had to be withdrawn from all bookstores and libraries. Most of these works were banned until the downfall of the National Socialist regime.

Victims

The event of May 10, 1933, led many poets and authors residing in the German Reich to feel obliged to leave the country after the burning of their books. A significant number of them viewed their situation as hopeless and committed suicide. Many authors who chose not to emigrate were subsequently persecuted by the SS and the Gestapo, murdered, or driven to suicide. For example, Erich Mühsam was killed by SS members at the Oranienburg concentration camp in 1934. Jewish author Gertrud Kolmar was sent to Auschwitz in 1943 after enduring years of forced labor in Berlin. Publicist and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Carl von Ossietzky died in a Berlin hospital in 1938 following several years at the Esterwegen concentration camp. Numerous others, including Walter Benjamin, Ernst Toller, Stefan Zweig, Kurt Tucholsky, and Egon Friedell, also committed suicide.
