Computers were born in the military and raised by the consumer society. Today, their greatest value may be neither military nor commercial but environmental. Coming to grips with the great task of the 21st century - to reconcile hopes for global prosperity with the need for a healthy environment - will require a far more detailed understanding of both. It is in this pursuit that the computer may find its greatest application. And in addition to applying information technology to environmental management, computer manufacturers are themselves serving as model corporate citizens when it comes to the environment, taking the lead on initiatives in areas like energy conservation, waste minimization, and elimination of ozone-depleting substances.

Computers and information technology are already providing a wide range of solutions to local, national, and global environmental problems. Companies have realized that successful management of the environment requires successful management of information. To protect the quality of water and air, monitor radiation, and perform meteorological forecasting, huge amounts of data must be analyzed. In such areas, new minicomputer families enable users to take advantage of processing power previously available only in supercomputers; this is good news for scientists working on macroenvironmental problems, such as satellite remote sensing, global modeling, transborder pollution tracking, and computer-based mapping.

The Massachusetts Office of Environmental Affairs, for example, faces the enormous task of analyzing watershed areas in 26 towns, reporting to and involving local citizens, while providing immediate solutions to water pollution in affected areas. Its newly acquired geographical information system provides it with statewide data for environmental planning, monitoring, and enforcement. With less duplications of data, better communications, and utilization of resources, it can display information graphically in public forums and implement data-quality standards. "It is the visual breakthrough that allows the average citizen to better understand why environmental protection is necessary," says Walter Bickford, former commissioner, Department of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Enforcement, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.

Computer companies have also been pioneers in recycling end-of-life computer equipment. Much of this now finds a second life in automobile bumpers, ceramics, and building materials. Formerly, it would probably have gone directly to the waste dump.