Here’s a date for your diary: Sunday 4th May, World Laughter Day. Described by its founder, Dr Madan Kataria, as "a very auspicious day for the whole planet", it will be marked by groups of people the world over getting together for a good giggle.

Kataria, who introduced this annual event 10 years ago, says we need more laughter in our lives to combat the global rise of stress, loneliness, and depression. But that’s daft, isn’t it? Surely that strange yelping sound that we emit periodically can’t be the answer to such pressing problems.

If we ask ourselves what triggers a good chortle, the obvious answer is that it is a response to something we find funny. But one scientist, Robert Provine, who has spent nearly two decades studying laughter, says that humor has surprisingly little to do with it. Instead, it seems to lie at the root of such lofty questions as the perception of self and the evolution of speech, language, and social behavior.

Provine, a neuroscientist at the University of Maryland in the US and author of "Laughter: A Scientific Investigation", realized early on in his research that you cannot capture real-life laughter in the lab because as soon as you place it under scrutiny, it vanishes. So, instead, he gathered his data by hanging around groups of people, eavesdropping on their conversations, surreptitiously noting when they laughed.

Over the course of a year, he collected 1200 laugh episodes – an episode being defined as the comment immediately preceding the laughter and the laughter itself – which he sorted by speaker (the person talking), audience (the person being addressed), gender, and pre-laugh comment.

His analysis of this data revealed three important facts about laughter. Firstly, that it is all about relationships. Secondly, that it occurs during phrase breaks in speech. And thirdly, that it is not consciously controlled. "It’s a message we send to other people – it practically disappears when we’re by ourselves," he says. "And it’s not a choice. Ask someone to laugh, and they'll either try to fake a laugh or say they can't laugh on command."