You don't have to be too old to remember when everything online was referred to as "cyber-this" or "cyber-that". In fact, the proliferation of words nodding to "cyberspace" was so overwhelming that in 1998, the New York Times predicted that "cyber" would soon be on its way out. It just wasn't cool anymore.

In a way, the paper was right. Nobody really talks about cyberspace today—and web searches for the term have slumped over the past 10 years. But phrases like "cyber attack" or "cyber crime" have actually become more popular in recent years. Curiously enough, cyber has come to be associated almost exclusively with things that are dark or threatening.

But while "cyber" has become niche and unfashionable, the words we use to refer to the internet generally have also evolved. A more subtle shift, perhaps, but a handful of linguists have noticed that we just don't talk explicitly about "the internet" or even "the web" as much as we used to.

"I hear a lot more about 'online,' 'I went online,' I didn't 'go onto the internet'. Online in some ways I think has replaced some of the earlier locutions like 'internet' and 'cyber' because it's one simple label," explains Naomi Baron, professor of Linguistics.

Of course, we also increasingly substitute the verb "to google" for phrases meaning to search online for information and say things like, "Let me ask Google"—even if Google isn't the search tool that actually gets used. You might also have heard a friend say, "I'll Facebook you" to mean they'll send a message. This "verbing" of brand names is not new—think of "to hoover" or "to xerox"—but it certainly chimes with the common theme: that these technologies are becoming ever more ubiquitous and familiar. As such, the language associated with them does too.

Other terms have become shortened and less formal. We don't hyphenate "e-mail" anymore, and hardly anyone, if they do mention "internet" in writing, will capitalize the "I". There have also been changes in the language we use to interact with the web itself. Apps like Siri and Google Now encourage users to ask questions in a natural form of speech.