Psychologists have highlighted empathy's central place in the bank of social and emotional skills that young people need to develop. Research reveals the significance of these life skills, showing that social and emotional skills are more significant for young people's academic attainment than their IQ. Our brains are plastic, and 98 percent of us are capable of building our empathy skills at any time in our lives.

Teaching empathy is key because, in doing so, we alert children to ways of modifying their relationships with one another that benefit the whole school community. Anyone who has read a compelling story to a class knows the power of it: stories cast a spell.

The demands of the curriculum mean that focused social and emotional learning is often squeezed or completely neglected. Using stories as our starting point produces a lighter touch – listeners are drawn in and able to reflect on human behavior and motives. If we simply lecture children about caring for each other, they won't engage in the same way. Also, using stories protects the children in the class who are vulnerable: we explore characters in a story, allowing difficult home lives to be held at arm's length. This is not to say that other approaches to developing greater empathy are of no value, but simply to underline the power of stories in seeding the ground.

Our children are growing up in a society with a major empathy deficit. Hate crimes are at their highest level since records began, and there are growing concerns about the empathy-draining effects of social media.

If children become more capable of recognizing complex emotions, they have a vocabulary for life with which to meet the difficulties they will face and, crucially, we help them to be more aware of the needs of the people around them. Equipping young people with strong empathy skills can be a major engine for social change because understanding others helps us become better citizens, partners, and workmates. Some 94 percent of employers say that social and emotional skills are as important in the workplace as academic qualifications, and all frameworks for these skills highlight the importance of relating well to others.