When Sean Blanda started working remotely in 2017, the attraction of a "digital nomad" lifestyle - working at your laptop on the beach, say - wasn't lost on him. But after two years of working from home, Blanda, an editorial director for a tech company based in Philadelphia, knows only too well the many pitfalls of this way of life, with the greatest being isolation.

"You'll need a lot of quiet self-confidence," he recently wrote on Twitter. "You won't get the positive reinforcement you'd normally rely on from body language and the 'vibe' from being in an office."

Beyond the lack of interaction with colleagues - there are no ideas by osmosis, no overhearing others talking - there is also the lack of interaction with the wider world. "The main way most of us are connected to our local, geographical communities is through work," Blanda says. "When you remove that - when you're not commuting, you don't bump shoulders, you don't meet the guy who happens to have a cousin on your block and now you're friends - you have to work harder to feel connected."

Indeed, there are problems with blurring the line between work and home. Working alone may mean greater flexibility and fewer interruptions, but it is in those small interactions with colleagues that connections are made. In addition, the biggest hurdle when you are alone is that there is no one to help you regain perspective when things are not going according to plan. Not knowing when to say no to work - or how to switch off for the day - can quickly lead to being overwhelmed.

And yet, in spite of the obvious challenges of bringing your work home, it seems it is worth it: the vast majority of remote workers report enjoying the way they live and work. Of the 100-odd remote workers interviewed in a study, only about six said that they would return to the office given the chance. Everyone else loved it. Some of the interviewees pointed out that, after all, they had worked so hard to make their house a home that it is naturally where they feel best. And that may be about as good as working life can get.