Where you are, what you're doing, and who you are with all affect your personality in the moment. Over time, these influences can accumulate, shaping the kind of person you become. But you don't have to accept this state of affairs passively.

The poet Maya Angelou said, "Stand up straight and realize who you are, that you tower over your circumstances." She was certainly right in the sense that we can be canny about how we choose to spend our time: we can shape our circumstances so that they work for, not against, us.

For instance, if you would like to develop a more open-minded, sociable, warm personality, an important way to achieve this is to strive to place yourself into situations that lift your mood. This may sound obvious, but if you think honestly for a moment, how often are you strategic when planning your time? Rather than gritting your teeth as you endure yet another spell of boredom, try making a greater effort to plan ahead and seek out the sunlit places that promise more joy.

Psychologists at the University of Sheffield in England tested this approach recently. They conducted a study and gave half of their participants the following situation-selection instruction before the weekend and asked them to repeat it three times and commit to doing it: "If I am deciding what to do this weekend, then I will select activities that will make me feel good and avoid doing things that will make me feel bad!"

On Monday, all the participants provided a breakdown of what they'd spent the weekend doing and the emotions they'd experienced. The key finding was that those who followed the instruction experienced more positive emotions over the weekend. This was particularly the case for the participants with more neurotic personalities, who said they usually struggled to regulate their emotions. If you would like to be less neurotic, this could be a particularly useful approach for you.

The situation-selection strategy is not all easy sailing, though. An unfortunate and important obstacle to taking this more strategic approach to life and our own personality development is that a lot of the time, we are not very good at anticipating how different situations will make us feel.