Writing a diary is a great way to honestly express your thoughts and feelings - and, if memory fails, it's a wonderful window to the past! Maybe the practice of keeping a diary strikes some people as strange or old-fashioned. It often feels trivial to record things as they happen, but later they may prove useful, instructive, or even amusing.

Keeping a diary maintains the illusion of doing worthy things in a careful and thorough way every day - that you're not just spending your days without a real purpose. Which brings us to the next question: who are you writing for? Ultimately, it's yourself. Diary writing is the most private form of literary creation because you are both the author and (for the present at least) the sole reader.

There are great advantages to this. The first is the benefit to your mental health. The diary is a safety-valve in the age of social media. There is no fear of being trolled or canceled when you only write for yourself, and you won't have to live out your regret in public.

The second advantage has more to do with existential curiosity: the long perspective of diary-writing furnishes a picture not just of what you did but of who you were. To read past diary notes helps you chart the progression of the self as it changes through time. Throughout the years, we evolve, we get rid of our old selves, and acquire new ones. Memory will play us false about our past, will blur the small changes or miscarry the meaning; a diary, while not always correct, can at least claim: "I was there at the time."

A third important advantage of the diary is its function as a work reminder. History does the broad sweep of years and decades. Biography does the intricate detail of character and incident. Diaries do both of these jobs and can prove a valuable tool when you need to determine things about past circumstances and events.

So, a diary gives you peace of mind and a place to order your thoughts or as a writer once said, "Diary writing gives us insights into who we are, who we were, and who we can become."